docs/concepts/session.md, before:

---
summary: "Session management rules, keys, and persistence for chats"
read_when:
  - Modifying session handling or storage
title: "Session Management"
---

# Session Management

OpenClaw treats **one direct-chat session per agent** as primary. Direct chats collapse to `agent:<agentId>:<mainKey>` (default `main`), while group/channel chats get their own keys. `session.mainKey` is honored.

Use `session.dmScope` to control how **direct messages** are grouped:

- `main` (default): all DMs share the main session for continuity.
- `per-peer`: isolate by sender id across channels.
- `per-channel-peer`: isolate by channel + sender (recommended for multi-user inboxes).
- `per-account-channel-peer`: isolate by account + channel + sender (recommended for multi-account inboxes).
  Use `session.identityLinks` to map provider-prefixed peer ids to a canonical identity so the same person shares a DM session across channels when using `per-peer`, `per-channel-peer`, or `per-account-channel-peer`.

### Secure DM mode (recommended for multi-user setups)

> **Security Warning:** If your agent can receive DMs from **multiple people**, you should enable secure DM mode. Without it, all users share the same conversation context, which can leak private information between users.

**Example of the problem with default settings:**

- User A (+1555) messages your agent about their medical appointment
- User B (+2666) messages your agent asking "What were we talking about?"
- User B sees User A's private medical information because they share the same session

**The fix:** Set `dmScope` to isolate sessions per user:

```json5
// ~/.openclaw/openclaw.json
{
  session: {
    // Secure DM mode: isolate DM context per channel + sender.
    dmScope: "per-channel-peer",
  },
}
```

**When to enable this:**

- You have pairing approvals for more than one sender
- You use a DM allowlist with multiple entries
- You set `dmPolicy: "open"`
- Multiple phone numbers or accounts can message your agent

Notes:

- Default is `dmScope: "main"` for continuity (all DMs share the main session). This is fine for single-user setups.
- For multi-account inboxes on the same channel, prefer `per-account-channel-peer`.
- If the same person contacts you on multiple channels, use `session.identityLinks` to collapse their DM sessions into one canonical identity.

## Gateway is the source of truth

All session state is **owned by the gateway** (the “master” OpenClaw). UI clients (macOS app, WebChat, etc.) must query the gateway for session lists and token counts instead of reading local files.

- In **remote mode**, the session store you care about lives on the remote gateway host, not your Mac.
- Token counts shown in UIs come from the gateway’s store fields (`inputTokens`, `outputTokens`, `totalTokens`, `contextTokens`). Clients do not parse JSONL transcripts to “fix up” totals.

## Where state lives

- On the **gateway host**:
  - Store file: `~/.openclaw/agents/<agentId>/sessions/sessions.json` (per agent).
- Transcripts: `~/.openclaw/agents/<agentId>/sessions/<SessionId>.jsonl` (Telegram topic sessions use `.../<SessionId>-topic-<threadId>.jsonl`).
- The store is a map `sessionKey -> { sessionId, updatedAt, ... }`. Deleting entries is safe; they are recreated on demand.
- Group entries may include `displayName`, `channel`, `subject`, `room`, and `space` to label sessions in UIs.
- Session entries include `origin` metadata (label + routing hints) so UIs can explain where a session came from.
- OpenClaw does **not** read legacy Pi/Tau session folders.

## Session pruning

OpenClaw trims **old tool results** from the in-memory context right before LLM calls by default.
This does **not** rewrite JSONL history. See [/concepts/session-pruning](/concepts/session-pruning).

## Pre-compaction memory flush

When a session nears auto-compaction, OpenClaw can run a **silent memory flush**
turn that reminds the model to write durable notes to disk. This only runs when
the workspace is writable. See [Memory](/concepts/memory) and
[Compaction](/concepts/compaction).

## Mapping transports → session keys

- Direct chats follow `session.dmScope` (default `main`).
  - `main`: `agent:<agentId>:<mainKey>` (continuity across devices/channels).
    - Multiple phone numbers and channels can map to the same agent main key; they act as transports into one conversation.
  - `per-peer`: `agent:<agentId>:dm:<peerId>`.
  - `per-channel-peer`: `agent:<agentId>:<channel>:dm:<peerId>`.
  - `per-account-channel-peer`: `agent:<agentId>:<channel>:<accountId>:dm:<peerId>` (accountId defaults to `default`).
  - If `session.identityLinks` matches a provider-prefixed peer id (for example `telegram:123`), the canonical key replaces `<peerId>` so the same person shares a session across channels.
- Group chats isolate state: `agent:<agentId>:<channel>:group:<id>` (rooms/channels use `agent:<agentId>:<channel>:channel:<id>`).
  - Telegram forum topics append `:topic:<threadId>` to the group id for isolation.
  - Legacy `group:<id>` keys are still recognized for migration.
- Inbound contexts may still use `group:<id>`; the channel is inferred from `Provider` and normalized to the canonical `agent:<agentId>:<channel>:group:<id>` form.
- Other sources:
  - Cron jobs: `cron:<job.id>`
  - Webhooks: `hook:<uuid>` (unless explicitly set by the hook)
  - Node runs: `node-<nodeId>`

## Lifecycle

- Reset policy: sessions are reused until they expire, and expiry is evaluated on the next inbound message.
- Daily reset: defaults to **4:00 AM local time on the gateway host**. A session is stale once its last update is earlier than the most recent daily reset time.
- Idle reset (optional): `idleMinutes` adds a sliding idle window. When both daily and idle resets are configured, **whichever expires first** forces a new session.
- Legacy idle-only: if you set `session.idleMinutes` without any `session.reset`/`resetByType` config, OpenClaw stays in idle-only mode for backward compatibility.
- Per-type overrides (optional): `resetByType` lets you override the policy for `dm`, `group`, and `thread` sessions (thread = Slack/Discord threads, Telegram topics, Matrix threads when provided by the connector).
- Per-channel overrides (optional): `resetByChannel` overrides the reset policy for a channel (applies to all session types for that channel and takes precedence over `reset`/`resetByType`).
- Reset triggers: exact `/new` or `/reset` (plus any extras in `resetTriggers`) start a fresh session id and pass the remainder of the message through. `/new <model>` accepts a model alias, `provider/model`, or provider name (fuzzy match) to set the new session model. If `/new` or `/reset` is sent alone, OpenClaw runs a short “hello” greeting turn to confirm the reset.
- Manual reset: delete specific keys from the store or remove the JSONL transcript; the next message recreates them.
- Isolated cron jobs always mint a fresh `sessionId` per run (no idle reuse).

## Send policy (optional)

Block delivery for specific session types without listing individual ids.

```json5
{
  session: {
    sendPolicy: {
      rules: [
        { action: "deny", match: { channel: "discord", chatType: "group" } },
        { action: "deny", match: { keyPrefix: "cron:" } },
      ],
      default: "allow",
    },
  },
}
```

Runtime override (owner only):

- `/send on` → allow for this session
- `/send off` → deny for this session
- `/send inherit` → clear override and use config rules
  Send these as standalone messages so they register.

## Configuration (optional rename example)

```json5
// ~/.openclaw/openclaw.json
{
  session: {
    scope: "per-sender", // keep group keys separate
    dmScope: "main", // DM continuity (set per-channel-peer/per-account-channel-peer for shared inboxes)
    identityLinks: {
      alice: ["telegram:123456789", "discord:987654321012345678"],
    },
    reset: {
      // Defaults: mode=daily, atHour=4 (gateway host local time).
      // If you also set idleMinutes, whichever expires first wins.
      mode: "daily",
      atHour: 4,
      idleMinutes: 120,
    },
    resetByType: {
      thread: { mode: "daily", atHour: 4 },
      dm: { mode: "idle", idleMinutes: 240 },
      group: { mode: "idle", idleMinutes: 120 },
    },
    resetByChannel: {
      discord: { mode: "idle", idleMinutes: 10080 },
    },
    resetTriggers: ["/new", "/reset"],
    store: "~/.openclaw/agents/{agentId}/sessions/sessions.json",
    mainKey: "main",
  },
}
```

## Inspecting

- `openclaw status` — shows store path and recent sessions.
- `openclaw sessions --json` — dumps every entry (filter with `--active <minutes>`).
- `openclaw gateway call sessions.list --params '{}'` — fetch sessions from the running gateway (use `--url`/`--token` for remote gateway access).
- Send `/status` as a standalone message in chat to see whether the agent is reachable, how much of the session context is used, current thinking/verbose toggles, and when your WhatsApp web creds were last refreshed (helps spot relink needs).
- Send `/context list` or `/context detail` to see what’s in the system prompt and injected workspace files (and the biggest context contributors).
- Send `/stop` as a standalone message to abort the current run, clear queued followups for that session, and stop any sub-agent runs spawned from it (the reply includes the stopped count).
- Send `/compact` (optional instructions) as a standalone message to summarize older context and free up window space. See [/concepts/compaction](/concepts/compaction).
- JSONL transcripts can be opened directly to review full turns.

## Tips

- Keep the primary key dedicated to 1:1 traffic; let groups keep their own keys.
- When automating cleanup, delete individual keys instead of the whole store to preserve context elsewhere.

## Session origin metadata

Each session entry records where it came from (best-effort) in `origin`:

- `label`: human label (resolved from conversation label + group subject/channel)
- `provider`: normalized channel id (including extensions)
- `from`/`to`: raw routing ids from the inbound envelope
- `accountId`: provider account id (when multi-account)
- `threadId`: thread/topic id when the channel supports it
  The origin fields are populated for direct messages, channels, and groups. If a
  connector only updates delivery routing (for example, to keep a DM main session
  fresh), it should still provide inbound context so the session keeps its
  explainer metadata. Extensions can do this by sending `ConversationLabel`,
  `GroupSubject`, `GroupChannel`, `GroupSpace`, and `SenderName` in the inbound
  context and calling `recordSessionMetaFromInbound` (or passing the same context
  to `updateLastRoute`).

Commit message:

docs: tighten secure DM example

docs/concepts/session.md, after:

---
summary: "Session management rules, keys, and persistence for chats"
read_when:
  - Modifying session handling or storage
title: "Session Management"
---

# Session Management

OpenClaw treats **one direct-chat session per agent** as primary. Direct chats collapse to `agent:<agentId>:<mainKey>` (default `main`), while group/channel chats get their own keys. `session.mainKey` is honored.

Use `session.dmScope` to control how **direct messages** are grouped:

- `main` (default): all DMs share the main session for continuity.
- `per-peer`: isolate by sender id across channels.
- `per-channel-peer`: isolate by channel + sender (recommended for multi-user inboxes).
- `per-account-channel-peer`: isolate by account + channel + sender (recommended for multi-account inboxes).
  Use `session.identityLinks` to map provider-prefixed peer ids to a canonical identity so the same person shares a DM session across channels when using `per-peer`, `per-channel-peer`, or `per-account-channel-peer`.

### Secure DM mode (recommended for multi-user setups)

> **Security Warning:** If your agent can receive DMs from **multiple people**, you should strongly consider enabling secure DM mode. Without it, all users share the same conversation context, which can leak private information between users.

**Example of the problem with default settings:**

- Alice (`<SENDER_A>`) messages your agent about a private topic (for example, a medical appointment)
- Bob (`<SENDER_B>`) messages your agent asking "What were we talking about?"
- Because both DMs share the same session, the model may answer Bob using Alice's prior context.

**The fix:** Set `dmScope` to isolate sessions per user:

```json5
// ~/.openclaw/openclaw.json
{
  session: {
    // Secure DM mode: isolate DM context per channel + sender.
    dmScope: "per-channel-peer",
  },
}
```

**When to enable this:**

- You have pairing approvals for more than one sender
- You use a DM allowlist with multiple entries
- You set `dmPolicy: "open"`
- Multiple phone numbers or accounts can message your agent

Notes:

- Default is `dmScope: "main"` for continuity (all DMs share the main session). This is fine for single-user setups.
- For multi-account inboxes on the same channel, prefer `per-account-channel-peer`.
- If the same person contacts you on multiple channels, use `session.identityLinks` to collapse their DM sessions into one canonical identity.
- You can verify your DM settings with `openclaw security audit` (see [security](/cli/security)).

## Gateway is the source of truth

All session state is **owned by the gateway** (the “master” OpenClaw). UI clients (macOS app, WebChat, etc.) must query the gateway for session lists and token counts instead of reading local files.

- In **remote mode**, the session store you care about lives on the remote gateway host, not your Mac.
- Token counts shown in UIs come from the gateway’s store fields (`inputTokens`, `outputTokens`, `totalTokens`, `contextTokens`). Clients do not parse JSONL transcripts to “fix up” totals.

## Where state lives

- On the **gateway host**:
  - Store file: `~/.openclaw/agents/<agentId>/sessions/sessions.json` (per agent).
- Transcripts: `~/.openclaw/agents/<agentId>/sessions/<SessionId>.jsonl` (Telegram topic sessions use `.../<SessionId>-topic-<threadId>.jsonl`).
- The store is a map `sessionKey -> { sessionId, updatedAt, ... }`. Deleting entries is safe; they are recreated on demand.
- Group entries may include `displayName`, `channel`, `subject`, `room`, and `space` to label sessions in UIs.
- Session entries include `origin` metadata (label + routing hints) so UIs can explain where a session came from.
- OpenClaw does **not** read legacy Pi/Tau session folders.

## Session pruning

OpenClaw trims **old tool results** from the in-memory context right before LLM calls by default.
This does **not** rewrite JSONL history. See [/concepts/session-pruning](/concepts/session-pruning).

## Pre-compaction memory flush

When a session nears auto-compaction, OpenClaw can run a **silent memory flush**
turn that reminds the model to write durable notes to disk. This only runs when
the workspace is writable. See [Memory](/concepts/memory) and
[Compaction](/concepts/compaction).

## Mapping transports → session keys

- Direct chats follow `session.dmScope` (default `main`).
  - `main`: `agent:<agentId>:<mainKey>` (continuity across devices/channels).
    - Multiple phone numbers and channels can map to the same agent main key; they act as transports into one conversation.
  - `per-peer`: `agent:<agentId>:dm:<peerId>`.
  - `per-channel-peer`: `agent:<agentId>:<channel>:dm:<peerId>`.
  - `per-account-channel-peer`: `agent:<agentId>:<channel>:<accountId>:dm:<peerId>` (accountId defaults to `default`).
  - If `session.identityLinks` matches a provider-prefixed peer id (for example `telegram:123`), the canonical key replaces `<peerId>` so the same person shares a session across channels.
- Group chats isolate state: `agent:<agentId>:<channel>:group:<id>` (rooms/channels use `agent:<agentId>:<channel>:channel:<id>`).
  - Telegram forum topics append `:topic:<threadId>` to the group id for isolation.
  - Legacy `group:<id>` keys are still recognized for migration.
- Inbound contexts may still use `group:<id>`; the channel is inferred from `Provider` and normalized to the canonical `agent:<agentId>:<channel>:group:<id>` form.
- Other sources:
  - Cron jobs: `cron:<job.id>`
  - Webhooks: `hook:<uuid>` (unless explicitly set by the hook)
  - Node runs: `node-<nodeId>`

## Lifecycle

- Reset policy: sessions are reused until they expire, and expiry is evaluated on the next inbound message.
- Daily reset: defaults to **4:00 AM local time on the gateway host**. A session is stale once its last update is earlier than the most recent daily reset time.
- Idle reset (optional): `idleMinutes` adds a sliding idle window. When both daily and idle resets are configured, **whichever expires first** forces a new session.
- Legacy idle-only: if you set `session.idleMinutes` without any `session.reset`/`resetByType` config, OpenClaw stays in idle-only mode for backward compatibility.
- Per-type overrides (optional): `resetByType` lets you override the policy for `dm`, `group`, and `thread` sessions (thread = Slack/Discord threads, Telegram topics, Matrix threads when provided by the connector).
- Per-channel overrides (optional): `resetByChannel` overrides the reset policy for a channel (applies to all session types for that channel and takes precedence over `reset`/`resetByType`).
- Reset triggers: exact `/new` or `/reset` (plus any extras in `resetTriggers`) start a fresh session id and pass the remainder of the message through. `/new <model>` accepts a model alias, `provider/model`, or provider name (fuzzy match) to set the new session model. If `/new` or `/reset` is sent alone, OpenClaw runs a short “hello” greeting turn to confirm the reset.
- Manual reset: delete specific keys from the store or remove the JSONL transcript; the next message recreates them.
- Isolated cron jobs always mint a fresh `sessionId` per run (no idle reuse).

## Send policy (optional)

Block delivery for specific session types without listing individual ids.

```json5
{
  session: {
    sendPolicy: {
      rules: [
        { action: "deny", match: { channel: "discord", chatType: "group" } },
        { action: "deny", match: { keyPrefix: "cron:" } },
      ],
      default: "allow",
    },
  },
}
```

Runtime override (owner only):

- `/send on` → allow for this session
- `/send off` → deny for this session
- `/send inherit` → clear override and use config rules
  Send these as standalone messages so they register.

## Configuration (optional rename example)

```json5
// ~/.openclaw/openclaw.json
{
  session: {
    scope: "per-sender", // keep group keys separate
    dmScope: "main", // DM continuity (set per-channel-peer/per-account-channel-peer for shared inboxes)
    identityLinks: {
      alice: ["telegram:123456789", "discord:987654321012345678"],
    },
    reset: {
      // Defaults: mode=daily, atHour=4 (gateway host local time).
      // If you also set idleMinutes, whichever expires first wins.
      mode: "daily",
      atHour: 4,
      idleMinutes: 120,
    },
    resetByType: {
      thread: { mode: "daily", atHour: 4 },
      dm: { mode: "idle", idleMinutes: 240 },
      group: { mode: "idle", idleMinutes: 120 },
    },
    resetByChannel: {
      discord: { mode: "idle", idleMinutes: 10080 },
    },
    resetTriggers: ["/new", "/reset"],
    store: "~/.openclaw/agents/{agentId}/sessions/sessions.json",
    mainKey: "main",
  },
}
```

## Inspecting

- `openclaw status` — shows store path and recent sessions.
- `openclaw sessions --json` — dumps every entry (filter with `--active <minutes>`).
- `openclaw gateway call sessions.list --params '{}'` — fetch sessions from the running gateway (use `--url`/`--token` for remote gateway access).
- Send `/status` as a standalone message in chat to see whether the agent is reachable, how much of the session context is used, current thinking/verbose toggles, and when your WhatsApp web creds were last refreshed (helps spot relink needs).
- Send `/context list` or `/context detail` to see what’s in the system prompt and injected workspace files (and the biggest context contributors).
- Send `/stop` as a standalone message to abort the current run, clear queued followups for that session, and stop any sub-agent runs spawned from it (the reply includes the stopped count).
- Send `/compact` (optional instructions) as a standalone message to summarize older context and free up window space. See [/concepts/compaction](/concepts/compaction).
- JSONL transcripts can be opened directly to review full turns.

## Tips

- Keep the primary key dedicated to 1:1 traffic; let groups keep their own keys.
- When automating cleanup, delete individual keys instead of the whole store to preserve context elsewhere.

## Session origin metadata

Each session entry records where it came from (best-effort) in `origin`:

- `label`: human label (resolved from conversation label + group subject/channel)
- `provider`: normalized channel id (including extensions)
- `from`/`to`: raw routing ids from the inbound envelope
- `accountId`: provider account id (when multi-account)
- `threadId`: thread/topic id when the channel supports it
  The origin fields are populated for direct messages, channels, and groups. If a
  connector only updates delivery routing (for example, to keep a DM main session
  fresh), it should still provide inbound context so the session keeps its
  explainer metadata. Extensions can do this by sending `ConversationLabel`,
  `GroupSubject`, `GroupChannel`, `GroupSpace`, and `SenderName` in the inbound
  context and calling `recordSessionMetaFromInbound` (or passing the same context
  to `updateLastRoute`).
