docs/cli/onboard.md, before:

---
summary: "CLI reference for `openclaw onboard` (interactive onboarding wizard)"
read_when:
  - You want guided setup for gateway, workspace, auth, channels, and skills
title: "onboard"
---

# `openclaw onboard`

Interactive onboarding wizard (local or remote Gateway setup).

## Related guides

- CLI onboarding hub: [Onboarding Wizard (CLI)](/start/wizard)
- Onboarding overview: [Onboarding Overview](/start/onboarding-overview)
- CLI onboarding reference: [CLI Onboarding Reference](/start/wizard-cli-reference)
- CLI automation: [CLI Automation](/start/wizard-cli-automation)
- macOS onboarding: [Onboarding (macOS App)](/start/onboarding)

## Examples

```bash
openclaw onboard
openclaw onboard --flow quickstart
openclaw onboard --flow manual
openclaw onboard --mode remote --remote-url ws://gateway-host:18789
```

Non-interactive custom provider:

```bash
openclaw onboard --non-interactive \
  --auth-choice custom-api-key \
  --custom-base-url "https://llm.example.com/v1" \
  --custom-model-id "foo-large" \
  --custom-api-key "$CUSTOM_API_KEY" \
  --custom-compatibility openai
```

`--custom-api-key` is optional in non-interactive mode. If omitted, onboarding checks `CUSTOM_API_KEY`.

Non-interactive Z.AI endpoint choices:

```bash
# Promptless endpoint selection
openclaw onboard --non-interactive \
  --auth-choice zai-coding-global \
  --zai-api-key "$ZAI_API_KEY"

# Other Z.AI endpoint choices:
# --auth-choice zai-coding-cn
# --auth-choice zai-global
# --auth-choice zai-cn
```

Flow notes:

- `quickstart`: minimal prompts, auto-generates a gateway token.
- `manual`: full prompts for port/bind/auth (alias of `advanced`).
- Fastest first chat: `openclaw dashboard` (Control UI, no channel setup).
- Custom Provider: connect any OpenAI or Anthropic compatible endpoint,
  including hosted providers not listed. Use Unknown to auto-detect.

## Common follow-up commands

```bash
openclaw configure
openclaw agents add <name>
```

<Note>
`--json` does not imply non-interactive mode. Use `--non-interactive` for scripts.
</Note>

Commit message:

feat(zai): auto-detect endpoint + default glm-5 (#14786)
* feat(zai): auto-detect endpoint + default glm-5

* test: fix Z.AI default endpoint expectation (#14786)

* test: bump embedded runner beforeAll timeout

* chore: update changelog for Z.AI GLM-5 autodetect (#14786)

* chore: resolve changelog merge conflict with main (#14786)

* chore: append changelog note for #14786 without merge conflict

* chore: sync changelog with main to resolve merge conflict

docs/cli/onboard.md, after:

---
summary: "CLI reference for `openclaw onboard` (interactive onboarding wizard)"
read_when:
  - You want guided setup for gateway, workspace, auth, channels, and skills
title: "onboard"
---

# `openclaw onboard`

Interactive onboarding wizard (local or remote Gateway setup).

## Related guides

- CLI onboarding hub: [Onboarding Wizard (CLI)](/start/wizard)
- Onboarding overview: [Onboarding Overview](/start/onboarding-overview)
- CLI onboarding reference: [CLI Onboarding Reference](/start/wizard-cli-reference)
- CLI automation: [CLI Automation](/start/wizard-cli-automation)
- macOS onboarding: [Onboarding (macOS App)](/start/onboarding)

## Examples

```bash
openclaw onboard
openclaw onboard --flow quickstart
openclaw onboard --flow manual
openclaw onboard --mode remote --remote-url ws://gateway-host:18789
```

Non-interactive custom provider:

```bash
openclaw onboard --non-interactive \
  --auth-choice custom-api-key \
  --custom-base-url "https://llm.example.com/v1" \
  --custom-model-id "foo-large" \
  --custom-api-key "$CUSTOM_API_KEY" \
  --custom-compatibility openai
```

`--custom-api-key` is optional in non-interactive mode. If omitted, onboarding checks `CUSTOM_API_KEY`.

Non-interactive Z.AI endpoint choices:

Note: `--auth-choice zai-api-key` now auto-detects the best Z.AI endpoint for your key (prefers the general API with `zai/glm-5`).
If you specifically want the GLM Coding Plan endpoints, pick `zai-coding-global` or `zai-coding-cn`.

```bash
# Promptless endpoint selection
openclaw onboard --non-interactive \
  --auth-choice zai-coding-global \
  --zai-api-key "$ZAI_API_KEY"

# Other Z.AI endpoint choices:
# --auth-choice zai-coding-cn
# --auth-choice zai-global
# --auth-choice zai-cn
```

Flow notes:

- `quickstart`: minimal prompts, auto-generates a gateway token.
- `manual`: full prompts for port/bind/auth (alias of `advanced`).
- Fastest first chat: `openclaw dashboard` (Control UI, no channel setup).
- Custom Provider: connect any OpenAI or Anthropic compatible endpoint,
  including hosted providers not listed. Use Unknown to auto-detect.

## Common follow-up commands

```bash
openclaw configure
openclaw agents add <name>
```

<Note>
`--json` does not imply non-interactive mode. Use `--non-interactive` for scripts.
</Note>
