docs/channels/whatsapp.md, before:

---
summary: "WhatsApp (web channel) integration: login, inbox, replies, media, and ops"
read_when:
  - Working on WhatsApp/web channel behavior or inbox routing
---
# WhatsApp (web channel)


Status: WhatsApp Web via Baileys only. Gateway owns the session(s).

## Quick setup (beginner)
1) Use a **separate phone number** if possible (recommended).
2) Configure WhatsApp in `~/.clawdbot/moltbot.json`.
3) Run `moltbot channels login` to scan the QR code (Linked Devices).
4) Start the gateway.

Minimal config:
```json5
{
  channels: {
    whatsapp: {
      dmPolicy: "allowlist",
      allowFrom: ["+15551234567"]
    }
  }
}
```

## Goals
- Multiple WhatsApp accounts (multi-account) in one Gateway process.
- Deterministic routing: replies return to WhatsApp, no model routing.
- Model sees enough context to understand quoted replies.

## Config writes
By default, WhatsApp is allowed to write config updates triggered by `/config set|unset` (requires `commands.config: true`).

Disable with:
```json5
{
  channels: { whatsapp: { configWrites: false } }
}
```

## Architecture (who owns what)
- **Gateway** owns the Baileys socket and inbox loop.
- **CLI / macOS app** talk to the gateway; no direct Baileys use.
- **Active listener** is required for outbound sends; otherwise send fails fast.

## Getting a phone number (two modes)

WhatsApp requires a real mobile number for verification. VoIP and virtual numbers are usually blocked. There are two supported ways to run Moltbot on WhatsApp:

### Dedicated number (recommended)
Use a **separate phone number** for Moltbot. Best UX, clean routing, no self-chat quirks. Ideal setup: **spare/old Android phone + eSIM**. Leave it on Wi‑Fi and power, and link it via QR.

**WhatsApp Business:** You can use WhatsApp Business on the same device with a different number. Great for keeping your personal WhatsApp separate — install WhatsApp Business and register the Moltbot number there.

**Sample config (dedicated number, single-user allowlist):**
```json5
{
  channels: {
    whatsapp: {
      dmPolicy: "allowlist",
      allowFrom: ["+15551234567"]
    }
  }
}
```

**Pairing mode (optional):**
If you want pairing instead of allowlist, set `channels.whatsapp.dmPolicy` to `pairing`. Unknown senders get a pairing code; approve with:
`moltbot pairing approve whatsapp <code>`

### Personal number (fallback)
Quick fallback: run Moltbot on **your own number**. Message yourself (WhatsApp “Message yourself”) for testing so you don’t spam contacts. Expect to read verification codes on your main phone during setup and experiments. **Must enable self-chat mode.**
When the wizard asks for your personal WhatsApp number, enter the phone you will message from (the owner/sender), not the assistant number.

**Sample config (personal number, self-chat):**
```json
{
  "whatsapp": {
    "selfChatMode": true,
    "dmPolicy": "allowlist",
    "allowFrom": ["+15551234567"]
  }
}
```

Self-chat replies default to `[{identity.name}]` when set (otherwise `[moltbot]`)
if `messages.responsePrefix` is unset. Set it explicitly to customize or disable
the prefix (use `""` to remove it).

### Number sourcing tips
- **Local eSIM** from your country's mobile carrier (most reliable)
  - Austria: [hot.at](https://www.hot.at)
  - UK: [giffgaff](https://www.giffgaff.com) — free SIM, no contract
- **Prepaid SIM** — cheap, just needs to receive one SMS for verification

**Avoid:** TextNow, Google Voice, most "free SMS" services — WhatsApp blocks these aggressively.

**Tip:** The number only needs to receive one verification SMS. After that, WhatsApp Web sessions persist via `creds.json`.

## Why Not Twilio?
- Early Moltbot builds supported Twilio’s WhatsApp Business integration.
- WhatsApp Business numbers are a poor fit for a personal assistant.
- Meta enforces a 24‑hour reply window; if you haven’t responded in the last 24 hours, the business number can’t initiate new messages.
- High-volume or “chatty” usage triggers aggressive blocking, because business accounts aren’t meant to send dozens of personal assistant messages.
- Result: unreliable delivery and frequent blocks, so support was removed.

## Login + credentials
- Login command: `moltbot channels login` (QR via Linked Devices).
- Multi-account login: `moltbot channels login --account <id>` (`<id>` = `accountId`).
- Default account (when `--account` is omitted): `default` if present, otherwise the first configured account id (sorted).
- Credentials stored in `~/.clawdbot/credentials/whatsapp/<accountId>/creds.json`.
- Backup copy at `creds.json.bak` (restored on corruption).
- Legacy compatibility: older installs stored Baileys files directly in `~/.clawdbot/credentials/`.
- Logout: `moltbot channels logout` (or `--account <id>`) deletes WhatsApp auth state (but keeps shared `oauth.json`).
- Logged-out socket => error instructs re-link.

## Inbound flow (DM + group)
- WhatsApp events come from `messages.upsert` (Baileys).
- Inbox listeners are detached on shutdown to avoid accumulating event handlers in tests/restarts.
- Status/broadcast chats are ignored.
- Direct chats use E.164; groups use group JID.
- **DM policy**: `channels.whatsapp.dmPolicy` controls direct chat access (default: `pairing`).
  - Pairing: unknown senders get a pairing code (approve via `moltbot pairing approve whatsapp <code>`; codes expire after 1 hour).
  - Open: requires `channels.whatsapp.allowFrom` to include `"*"`.
  - Self messages are always allowed; “self-chat mode” still requires `channels.whatsapp.allowFrom` to include your own number.

### Personal-number mode (fallback)
If you run Moltbot on your **personal WhatsApp number**, enable `channels.whatsapp.selfChatMode` (see sample above).

Behavior:
- Outbound DMs never trigger pairing replies (prevents spamming contacts).
- Inbound unknown senders still follow `channels.whatsapp.dmPolicy`.
- Self-chat mode (allowFrom includes your number) avoids auto read receipts and ignores mention JIDs.
- Read receipts sent for non-self-chat DMs.

## Read receipts
By default, the gateway marks inbound WhatsApp messages as read (blue ticks) once they are accepted.

Disable globally:
```json5
{
  channels: { whatsapp: { sendReadReceipts: false } }
}
```

Disable per account:
```json5
{
  channels: {
    whatsapp: {
      accounts: {
        personal: { sendReadReceipts: false }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Notes:
- Self-chat mode always skips read receipts.

## WhatsApp FAQ: sending messages + pairing

**Will Moltbot message random contacts when I link WhatsApp?**  
No. Default DM policy is **pairing**, so unknown senders only get a pairing code and their message is **not processed**. Moltbot only replies to chats it receives, or to sends you explicitly trigger (agent/CLI).

**How does pairing work on WhatsApp?**  
Pairing is a DM gate for unknown senders:
- First DM from a new sender returns a short code (message is not processed).
- Approve with: `moltbot pairing approve whatsapp <code>` (list with `moltbot pairing list whatsapp`).
- Codes expire after 1 hour; pending requests are capped at 3 per channel.

**Can multiple people use different Moltbots on one WhatsApp number?**  
Yes, by routing each sender to a different agent via `bindings` (peer `kind: "dm"`, sender E.164 like `+15551234567`). Replies still come from the **same WhatsApp account**, and direct chats collapse to each agent’s main session, so use **one agent per person**. DM access control (`dmPolicy`/`allowFrom`) is global per WhatsApp account. See [Multi-Agent Routing](/concepts/multi-agent).

**Why do you ask for my phone number in the wizard?**  
The wizard uses it to set your **allowlist/owner** so your own DMs are permitted. It’s not used for auto-sending. If you run on your personal WhatsApp number, use that same number and enable `channels.whatsapp.selfChatMode`.

## Message normalization (what the model sees)
- `Body` is the current message body with envelope.
- Quoted reply context is **always appended**:
  ```
  [Replying to +1555 id:ABC123]
  <quoted text or <media:...>>
  [/Replying]
  ```
- Reply metadata also set:
  - `ReplyToId` = stanzaId
  - `ReplyToBody` = quoted body or media placeholder
  - `ReplyToSender` = E.164 when known
- Media-only inbound messages use placeholders:
  - `<media:image|video|audio|document|sticker>`

## Groups
- Groups map to `agent:<agentId>:whatsapp:group:<jid>` sessions.
- Group policy: `channels.whatsapp.groupPolicy = open|disabled|allowlist` (default `allowlist`).
- Activation modes:
  - `mention` (default): requires @mention or regex match.
  - `always`: always triggers.
- `/activation mention|always` is owner-only and must be sent as a standalone message.
- Owner = `channels.whatsapp.allowFrom` (or self E.164 if unset).
- **History injection** (pending-only):
  - Recent *unprocessed* messages (default 50) inserted under:
    `[Chat messages since your last reply - for context]` (messages already in the session are not re-injected)
  - Current message under:
    `[Current message - respond to this]`
  - Sender suffix appended: `[from: Name (+E164)]`
- Group metadata cached 5 min (subject + participants).

## Reply delivery (threading)
- WhatsApp Web sends standard messages (no quoted reply threading in the current gateway).
- Reply tags are ignored on this channel.

## Acknowledgment reactions (auto-react on receipt)

WhatsApp can automatically send emoji reactions to incoming messages immediately upon receipt, before the bot generates a reply. This provides instant feedback to users that their message was received.

**Configuration:**
```json
{
  "whatsapp": {
    "ackReaction": {
      "emoji": "👀",
      "direct": true,
      "group": "mentions"
    }
  }
}
```

**Options:**
- `emoji` (string): Emoji to use for acknowledgment (e.g., "👀", "✅", "📨"). Empty or omitted = feature disabled.
- `direct` (boolean, default: `true`): Send reactions in direct/DM chats.
- `group` (string, default: `"mentions"`): Group chat behavior:
  - `"always"`: React to all group messages (even without @mention)
  - `"mentions"`: React only when bot is @mentioned
  - `"never"`: Never react in groups

**Per-account override:**
```json
{
  "whatsapp": {
    "accounts": {
      "work": {
        "ackReaction": {
          "emoji": "✅",
          "direct": false,
          "group": "always"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**Behavior notes:**
- Reactions are sent **immediately** upon message receipt, before typing indicators or bot replies.
- In groups with `requireMention: false` (activation: always), `group: "mentions"` will react to all messages (not just @mentions).
- Fire-and-forget: reaction failures are logged but don't prevent the bot from replying.
- Participant JID is automatically included for group reactions.
- WhatsApp ignores `messages.ackReaction`; use `channels.whatsapp.ackReaction` instead.

## Agent tool (reactions)
- Tool: `whatsapp` with `react` action (`chatJid`, `messageId`, `emoji`, optional `remove`).
- Optional: `participant` (group sender), `fromMe` (reacting to your own message), `accountId` (multi-account).
- Reaction removal semantics: see [/tools/reactions](/tools/reactions).
- Tool gating: `channels.whatsapp.actions.reactions` (default: enabled).

## Limits
- Outbound text is chunked to `channels.whatsapp.textChunkLimit` (default 4000).
- Optional newline chunking: set `channels.whatsapp.chunkMode="newline"` to split on blank lines (paragraph boundaries) before length chunking.
- Inbound media saves are capped by `channels.whatsapp.mediaMaxMb` (default 50 MB).
- Outbound media items are capped by `agents.defaults.mediaMaxMb` (default 5 MB).

## Outbound send (text + media)
- Uses active web listener; error if gateway not running.
- Text chunking: 4k max per message (configurable via `channels.whatsapp.textChunkLimit`, optional `channels.whatsapp.chunkMode`).
- Media:
  - Image/video/audio/document supported.
  - Audio sent as PTT; `audio/ogg` => `audio/ogg; codecs=opus`.
  - Caption only on first media item.
  - Media fetch supports HTTP(S) and local paths.
  - Animated GIFs: WhatsApp expects MP4 with `gifPlayback: true` for inline looping.
    - CLI: `moltbot message send --media <mp4> --gif-playback`
    - Gateway: `send` params include `gifPlayback: true`

## Voice notes (PTT audio)
WhatsApp sends audio as **voice notes** (PTT bubble).
- Best results: OGG/Opus. Moltbot rewrites `audio/ogg` to `audio/ogg; codecs=opus`.
- `[[audio_as_voice]]` is ignored for WhatsApp (audio already ships as voice note).

## Media limits + optimization
- Default outbound cap: 5 MB (per media item).
- Override: `agents.defaults.mediaMaxMb`.
- Images are auto-optimized to JPEG under cap (resize + quality sweep).
- Oversize media => error; media reply falls back to text warning.

## Heartbeats
- **Gateway heartbeat** logs connection health (`web.heartbeatSeconds`, default 60s).
- **Agent heartbeat** can be configured per agent (`agents.list[].heartbeat`) or globally
  via `agents.defaults.heartbeat` (fallback when no per-agent entries are set).
  - Uses the configured heartbeat prompt (default: `Read HEARTBEAT.md if it exists (workspace context). Follow it strictly. Do not infer or repeat old tasks from prior chats. If nothing needs attention, reply HEARTBEAT_OK.`) + `HEARTBEAT_OK` skip behavior.
  - Delivery defaults to the last used channel (or configured target).

## Reconnect behavior
- Backoff policy: `web.reconnect`:
  - `initialMs`, `maxMs`, `factor`, `jitter`, `maxAttempts`.
- If maxAttempts reached, web monitoring stops (degraded).
- Logged-out => stop and require re-link.

## Config quick map
- `channels.whatsapp.dmPolicy` (DM policy: pairing/allowlist/open/disabled).
- `channels.whatsapp.selfChatMode` (same-phone setup; bot uses your personal WhatsApp number).
- `channels.whatsapp.allowFrom` (DM allowlist). WhatsApp uses E.164 phone numbers (no usernames).
- `channels.whatsapp.mediaMaxMb` (inbound media save cap).
- `channels.whatsapp.ackReaction` (auto-reaction on message receipt: `{emoji, direct, group}`).
- `channels.whatsapp.accounts.<accountId>.*` (per-account settings + optional `authDir`).
- `channels.whatsapp.accounts.<accountId>.mediaMaxMb` (per-account inbound media cap).
- `channels.whatsapp.accounts.<accountId>.ackReaction` (per-account ack reaction override).
- `channels.whatsapp.groupAllowFrom` (group sender allowlist).
- `channels.whatsapp.groupPolicy` (group policy).
- `channels.whatsapp.historyLimit` / `channels.whatsapp.accounts.<accountId>.historyLimit` (group history context; `0` disables).
- `channels.whatsapp.dmHistoryLimit` (DM history limit in user turns). Per-user overrides: `channels.whatsapp.dms["<phone>"].historyLimit`.
- `channels.whatsapp.groups` (group allowlist + mention gating defaults; use `"*"` to allow all)
- `channels.whatsapp.actions.reactions` (gate WhatsApp tool reactions).
- `agents.list[].groupChat.mentionPatterns` (or `messages.groupChat.mentionPatterns`)
- `messages.groupChat.historyLimit`
- `channels.whatsapp.messagePrefix` (inbound prefix; per-account: `channels.whatsapp.accounts.<accountId>.messagePrefix`; deprecated: `messages.messagePrefix`)
- `messages.responsePrefix` (outbound prefix)
- `agents.defaults.mediaMaxMb`
- `agents.defaults.heartbeat.every`
- `agents.defaults.heartbeat.model` (optional override)
- `agents.defaults.heartbeat.target`
- `agents.defaults.heartbeat.to`
- `agents.defaults.heartbeat.session`
- `agents.list[].heartbeat.*` (per-agent overrides)
- `session.*` (scope, idle, store, mainKey)
- `web.enabled` (disable channel startup when false)
- `web.heartbeatSeconds`
- `web.reconnect.*`

## Logs + troubleshooting
- Subsystems: `whatsapp/inbound`, `whatsapp/outbound`, `web-heartbeat`, `web-reconnect`.
- Log file: `/tmp/moltbot/moltbot-YYYY-MM-DD.log` (configurable).
- Troubleshooting guide: [Gateway troubleshooting](/gateway/troubleshooting).

## Troubleshooting (quick)

**Not linked / QR login required**
- Symptom: `channels status` shows `linked: false` or warns “Not linked”.
- Fix: run `moltbot channels login` on the gateway host and scan the QR (WhatsApp → Settings → Linked Devices).

**Linked but disconnected / reconnect loop**
- Symptom: `channels status` shows `running, disconnected` or warns “Linked but disconnected”.
- Fix: `moltbot doctor` (or restart the gateway). If it persists, relink via `channels login` and inspect `moltbot logs --follow`.

**Bun runtime**
- Bun is **not recommended**. WhatsApp (Baileys) and Telegram are unreliable on Bun.
  Run the gateway with **Node**. (See Getting Started runtime note.)

Commit message:

docs(whatsapp): clarify self-message dmPolicy bypass Self messages from the linked WhatsApp number bypass dmPolicy and allowFrom checks automatically. Clarified that users don't need to add their own number to the allowlist.
Self messages from the linked WhatsApp number bypass dmPolicy checks
entirely (via isSamePhone check in access-control.ts)...

docs/channels/whatsapp.md, after:

---
summary: "WhatsApp (web channel) integration: login, inbox, replies, media, and ops"
read_when:
  - Working on WhatsApp/web channel behavior or inbox routing
---
# WhatsApp (web channel)


Status: WhatsApp Web via Baileys only. Gateway owns the session(s).

## Quick setup (beginner)
1) Use a **separate phone number** if possible (recommended).
2) Configure WhatsApp in `~/.clawdbot/moltbot.json`.
3) Run `moltbot channels login` to scan the QR code (Linked Devices).
4) Start the gateway.

Minimal config:
```json5
{
  channels: {
    whatsapp: {
      dmPolicy: "allowlist",
      allowFrom: ["+15551234567"]
    }
  }
}
```

## Goals
- Multiple WhatsApp accounts (multi-account) in one Gateway process.
- Deterministic routing: replies return to WhatsApp, no model routing.
- Model sees enough context to understand quoted replies.

## Config writes
By default, WhatsApp is allowed to write config updates triggered by `/config set|unset` (requires `commands.config: true`).

Disable with:
```json5
{
  channels: { whatsapp: { configWrites: false } }
}
```

## Architecture (who owns what)
- **Gateway** owns the Baileys socket and inbox loop.
- **CLI / macOS app** talk to the gateway; no direct Baileys use.
- **Active listener** is required for outbound sends; otherwise send fails fast.

## Getting a phone number (two modes)

WhatsApp requires a real mobile number for verification. VoIP and virtual numbers are usually blocked. There are two supported ways to run Moltbot on WhatsApp:

### Dedicated number (recommended)
Use a **separate phone number** for Moltbot. Best UX, clean routing, no self-chat quirks. Ideal setup: **spare/old Android phone + eSIM**. Leave it on Wi‑Fi and power, and link it via QR.

**WhatsApp Business:** You can use WhatsApp Business on the same device with a different number. Great for keeping your personal WhatsApp separate — install WhatsApp Business and register the Moltbot number there.

**Sample config (dedicated number, single-user allowlist):**
```json5
{
  channels: {
    whatsapp: {
      dmPolicy: "allowlist",
      allowFrom: ["+15551234567"]
    }
  }
}
```

**Pairing mode (optional):**
If you want pairing instead of allowlist, set `channels.whatsapp.dmPolicy` to `pairing`. Unknown senders get a pairing code; approve with:
`moltbot pairing approve whatsapp <code>`

### Personal number (fallback)
Quick fallback: run Moltbot on **your own number**. Message yourself (WhatsApp “Message yourself”) for testing so you don’t spam contacts. Expect to read verification codes on your main phone during setup and experiments. **Must enable self-chat mode.**
When the wizard asks for your personal WhatsApp number, enter the phone you will message from (the owner/sender), not the assistant number.

**Sample config (personal number, self-chat):**
```json
{
  "whatsapp": {
    "selfChatMode": true,
    "dmPolicy": "allowlist",
    "allowFrom": ["+15551234567"]
  }
}
```

Self-chat replies default to `[{identity.name}]` when set (otherwise `[moltbot]`)
if `messages.responsePrefix` is unset. Set it explicitly to customize or disable
the prefix (use `""` to remove it).

### Number sourcing tips
- **Local eSIM** from your country's mobile carrier (most reliable)
  - Austria: [hot.at](https://www.hot.at)
  - UK: [giffgaff](https://www.giffgaff.com) — free SIM, no contract
- **Prepaid SIM** — cheap, just needs to receive one SMS for verification

**Avoid:** TextNow, Google Voice, most "free SMS" services — WhatsApp blocks these aggressively.

**Tip:** The number only needs to receive one verification SMS. After that, WhatsApp Web sessions persist via `creds.json`.

## Why Not Twilio?
- Early Moltbot builds supported Twilio’s WhatsApp Business integration.
- WhatsApp Business numbers are a poor fit for a personal assistant.
- Meta enforces a 24‑hour reply window; if you haven’t responded in the last 24 hours, the business number can’t initiate new messages.
- High-volume or “chatty” usage triggers aggressive blocking, because business accounts aren’t meant to send dozens of personal assistant messages.
- Result: unreliable delivery and frequent blocks, so support was removed.

## Login + credentials
- Login command: `moltbot channels login` (QR via Linked Devices).
- Multi-account login: `moltbot channels login --account <id>` (`<id>` = `accountId`).
- Default account (when `--account` is omitted): `default` if present, otherwise the first configured account id (sorted).
- Credentials stored in `~/.clawdbot/credentials/whatsapp/<accountId>/creds.json`.
- Backup copy at `creds.json.bak` (restored on corruption).
- Legacy compatibility: older installs stored Baileys files directly in `~/.clawdbot/credentials/`.
- Logout: `moltbot channels logout` (or `--account <id>`) deletes WhatsApp auth state (but keeps shared `oauth.json`).
- Logged-out socket => error instructs re-link.

## Inbound flow (DM + group)
- WhatsApp events come from `messages.upsert` (Baileys).
- Inbox listeners are detached on shutdown to avoid accumulating event handlers in tests/restarts.
- Status/broadcast chats are ignored.
- Direct chats use E.164; groups use group JID.
- **DM policy**: `channels.whatsapp.dmPolicy` controls direct chat access (default: `pairing`).
  - Pairing: unknown senders get a pairing code (approve via `moltbot pairing approve whatsapp <code>`; codes expire after 1 hour).
  - Open: requires `channels.whatsapp.allowFrom` to include `"*"`.
  - Self messages (from the linked WhatsApp number) automatically bypass `channels.whatsapp.dmPolicy` and `channels.whatsapp.allowFrom` checks — your own number is implicitly trusted.

### Personal-number mode (fallback)
If you run Moltbot on your **personal WhatsApp number**, enable `channels.whatsapp.selfChatMode` (see sample above).

Behavior:
- Outbound DMs never trigger pairing replies (prevents spamming contacts).
- Inbound unknown senders still follow `channels.whatsapp.dmPolicy`.
- Self-chat mode (allowFrom includes your number) avoids auto read receipts and ignores mention JIDs.
- Read receipts sent for non-self-chat DMs.

## Read receipts
By default, the gateway marks inbound WhatsApp messages as read (blue ticks) once they are accepted.

Disable globally:
```json5
{
  channels: { whatsapp: { sendReadReceipts: false } }
}
```

Disable per account:
```json5
{
  channels: {
    whatsapp: {
      accounts: {
        personal: { sendReadReceipts: false }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Notes:
- Self-chat mode always skips read receipts.

## WhatsApp FAQ: sending messages + pairing

**Will Moltbot message random contacts when I link WhatsApp?**  
No. Default DM policy is **pairing**, so unknown senders only get a pairing code and their message is **not processed**. Moltbot only replies to chats it receives, or to sends you explicitly trigger (agent/CLI).

**How does pairing work on WhatsApp?**  
Pairing is a DM gate for unknown senders:
- First DM from a new sender returns a short code (message is not processed).
- Approve with: `moltbot pairing approve whatsapp <code>` (list with `moltbot pairing list whatsapp`).
- Codes expire after 1 hour; pending requests are capped at 3 per channel.

**Can multiple people use different Moltbots on one WhatsApp number?**  
Yes, by routing each sender to a different agent via `bindings` (peer `kind: "dm"`, sender E.164 like `+15551234567`). Replies still come from the **same WhatsApp account**, and direct chats collapse to each agent’s main session, so use **one agent per person**. DM access control (`dmPolicy`/`allowFrom`) is global per WhatsApp account. See [Multi-Agent Routing](/concepts/multi-agent).

**Why do you ask for my phone number in the wizard?**  
The wizard uses it to set your **allowlist/owner** so your own DMs are permitted. It’s not used for auto-sending. If you run on your personal WhatsApp number, use that same number and enable `channels.whatsapp.selfChatMode`.

## Message normalization (what the model sees)
- `Body` is the current message body with envelope.
- Quoted reply context is **always appended**:
  ```
  [Replying to +1555 id:ABC123]
  <quoted text or <media:...>>
  [/Replying]
  ```
- Reply metadata also set:
  - `ReplyToId` = stanzaId
  - `ReplyToBody` = quoted body or media placeholder
  - `ReplyToSender` = E.164 when known
- Media-only inbound messages use placeholders:
  - `<media:image|video|audio|document|sticker>`

## Groups
- Groups map to `agent:<agentId>:whatsapp:group:<jid>` sessions.
- Group policy: `channels.whatsapp.groupPolicy = open|disabled|allowlist` (default `allowlist`).
- Activation modes:
  - `mention` (default): requires @mention or regex match.
  - `always`: always triggers.
- `/activation mention|always` is owner-only and must be sent as a standalone message.
- Owner = `channels.whatsapp.allowFrom` (or self E.164 if unset).
- **History injection** (pending-only):
  - Recent *unprocessed* messages (default 50) inserted under:
    `[Chat messages since your last reply - for context]` (messages already in the session are not re-injected)
  - Current message under:
    `[Current message - respond to this]`
  - Sender suffix appended: `[from: Name (+E164)]`
- Group metadata cached 5 min (subject + participants).

## Reply delivery (threading)
- WhatsApp Web sends standard messages (no quoted reply threading in the current gateway).
- Reply tags are ignored on this channel.

## Acknowledgment reactions (auto-react on receipt)

WhatsApp can automatically send emoji reactions to incoming messages immediately upon receipt, before the bot generates a reply. This provides instant feedback to users that their message was received.

**Configuration:**
```json
{
  "whatsapp": {
    "ackReaction": {
      "emoji": "👀",
      "direct": true,
      "group": "mentions"
    }
  }
}
```

**Options:**
- `emoji` (string): Emoji to use for acknowledgment (e.g., "👀", "✅", "📨"). Empty or omitted = feature disabled.
- `direct` (boolean, default: `true`): Send reactions in direct/DM chats.
- `group` (string, default: `"mentions"`): Group chat behavior:
  - `"always"`: React to all group messages (even without @mention)
  - `"mentions"`: React only when bot is @mentioned
  - `"never"`: Never react in groups

**Per-account override:**
```json
{
  "whatsapp": {
    "accounts": {
      "work": {
        "ackReaction": {
          "emoji": "✅",
          "direct": false,
          "group": "always"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**Behavior notes:**
- Reactions are sent **immediately** upon message receipt, before typing indicators or bot replies.
- In groups with `requireMention: false` (activation: always), `group: "mentions"` will react to all messages (not just @mentions).
- Fire-and-forget: reaction failures are logged but don't prevent the bot from replying.
- Participant JID is automatically included for group reactions.
- WhatsApp ignores `messages.ackReaction`; use `channels.whatsapp.ackReaction` instead.

## Agent tool (reactions)
- Tool: `whatsapp` with `react` action (`chatJid`, `messageId`, `emoji`, optional `remove`).
- Optional: `participant` (group sender), `fromMe` (reacting to your own message), `accountId` (multi-account).
- Reaction removal semantics: see [/tools/reactions](/tools/reactions).
- Tool gating: `channels.whatsapp.actions.reactions` (default: enabled).

## Limits
- Outbound text is chunked to `channels.whatsapp.textChunkLimit` (default 4000).
- Optional newline chunking: set `channels.whatsapp.chunkMode="newline"` to split on blank lines (paragraph boundaries) before length chunking.
- Inbound media saves are capped by `channels.whatsapp.mediaMaxMb` (default 50 MB).
- Outbound media items are capped by `agents.defaults.mediaMaxMb` (default 5 MB).

## Outbound send (text + media)
- Uses active web listener; error if gateway not running.
- Text chunking: 4k max per message (configurable via `channels.whatsapp.textChunkLimit`, optional `channels.whatsapp.chunkMode`).
- Media:
  - Image/video/audio/document supported.
  - Audio sent as PTT; `audio/ogg` => `audio/ogg; codecs=opus`.
  - Caption only on first media item.
  - Media fetch supports HTTP(S) and local paths.
  - Animated GIFs: WhatsApp expects MP4 with `gifPlayback: true` for inline looping.
    - CLI: `moltbot message send --media <mp4> --gif-playback`
    - Gateway: `send` params include `gifPlayback: true`

## Voice notes (PTT audio)
WhatsApp sends audio as **voice notes** (PTT bubble).
- Best results: OGG/Opus. Moltbot rewrites `audio/ogg` to `audio/ogg; codecs=opus`.
- `[[audio_as_voice]]` is ignored for WhatsApp (audio already ships as voice note).

## Media limits + optimization
- Default outbound cap: 5 MB (per media item).
- Override: `agents.defaults.mediaMaxMb`.
- Images are auto-optimized to JPEG under cap (resize + quality sweep).
- Oversize media => error; media reply falls back to text warning.

## Heartbeats
- **Gateway heartbeat** logs connection health (`web.heartbeatSeconds`, default 60s).
- **Agent heartbeat** can be configured per agent (`agents.list[].heartbeat`) or globally
  via `agents.defaults.heartbeat` (fallback when no per-agent entries are set).
  - Uses the configured heartbeat prompt (default: `Read HEARTBEAT.md if it exists (workspace context). Follow it strictly. Do not infer or repeat old tasks from prior chats. If nothing needs attention, reply HEARTBEAT_OK.`) + `HEARTBEAT_OK` skip behavior.
  - Delivery defaults to the last used channel (or configured target).

## Reconnect behavior
- Backoff policy: `web.reconnect`:
  - `initialMs`, `maxMs`, `factor`, `jitter`, `maxAttempts`.
- If maxAttempts reached, web monitoring stops (degraded).
- Logged-out => stop and require re-link.

## Config quick map
- `channels.whatsapp.dmPolicy` (DM policy: pairing/allowlist/open/disabled).
- `channels.whatsapp.selfChatMode` (same-phone setup; bot uses your personal WhatsApp number).
- `channels.whatsapp.allowFrom` (DM allowlist). WhatsApp uses E.164 phone numbers (no usernames).
- `channels.whatsapp.mediaMaxMb` (inbound media save cap).
- `channels.whatsapp.ackReaction` (auto-reaction on message receipt: `{emoji, direct, group}`).
- `channels.whatsapp.accounts.<accountId>.*` (per-account settings + optional `authDir`).
- `channels.whatsapp.accounts.<accountId>.mediaMaxMb` (per-account inbound media cap).
- `channels.whatsapp.accounts.<accountId>.ackReaction` (per-account ack reaction override).
- `channels.whatsapp.groupAllowFrom` (group sender allowlist).
- `channels.whatsapp.groupPolicy` (group policy).
- `channels.whatsapp.historyLimit` / `channels.whatsapp.accounts.<accountId>.historyLimit` (group history context; `0` disables).
- `channels.whatsapp.dmHistoryLimit` (DM history limit in user turns). Per-user overrides: `channels.whatsapp.dms["<phone>"].historyLimit`.
- `channels.whatsapp.groups` (group allowlist + mention gating defaults; use `"*"` to allow all)
- `channels.whatsapp.actions.reactions` (gate WhatsApp tool reactions).
- `agents.list[].groupChat.mentionPatterns` (or `messages.groupChat.mentionPatterns`)
- `messages.groupChat.historyLimit`
- `channels.whatsapp.messagePrefix` (inbound prefix; per-account: `channels.whatsapp.accounts.<accountId>.messagePrefix`; deprecated: `messages.messagePrefix`)
- `messages.responsePrefix` (outbound prefix)
- `agents.defaults.mediaMaxMb`
- `agents.defaults.heartbeat.every`
- `agents.defaults.heartbeat.model` (optional override)
- `agents.defaults.heartbeat.target`
- `agents.defaults.heartbeat.to`
- `agents.defaults.heartbeat.session`
- `agents.list[].heartbeat.*` (per-agent overrides)
- `session.*` (scope, idle, store, mainKey)
- `web.enabled` (disable channel startup when false)
- `web.heartbeatSeconds`
- `web.reconnect.*`

## Logs + troubleshooting
- Subsystems: `whatsapp/inbound`, `whatsapp/outbound`, `web-heartbeat`, `web-reconnect`.
- Log file: `/tmp/moltbot/moltbot-YYYY-MM-DD.log` (configurable).
- Troubleshooting guide: [Gateway troubleshooting](/gateway/troubleshooting).

## Troubleshooting (quick)

**Not linked / QR login required**
- Symptom: `channels status` shows `linked: false` or warns “Not linked”.
- Fix: run `moltbot channels login` on the gateway host and scan the QR (WhatsApp → Settings → Linked Devices).

**Linked but disconnected / reconnect loop**
- Symptom: `channels status` shows `running, disconnected` or warns “Linked but disconnected”.
- Fix: `moltbot doctor` (or restart the gateway). If it persists, relink via `channels login` and inspect `moltbot logs --follow`.

**Bun runtime**
- Bun is **not recommended**. WhatsApp (Baileys) and Telegram are unreliable on Bun.
  Run the gateway with **Node**. (See Getting Started runtime note.)
