docs/tools/web.md, before:

---
summary: "Web search + fetch tools (Brave Search API, Perplexity direct/OpenRouter)"
read_when:
  - You want to enable web_search or web_fetch
  - You need Brave Search API key setup
  - You want to use Perplexity Sonar for web search
---

# Web tools

Clawdbot ships two lightweight web tools:

- `web_search` — Search the web via Brave Search API (default) or Perplexity Sonar (direct or via OpenRouter).
- `web_fetch` — HTTP fetch + readable extraction (HTML → markdown/text).

These are **not** browser automation. For JS-heavy sites or logins, use the
[Browser tool](/tools/browser).

## How it works

- `web_search` calls your configured provider and returns results.
  - **Brave** (default): returns structured results (title, URL, snippet).
  - **Perplexity**: returns AI-synthesized answers with citations from real-time web search.
- Results are cached by query for 15 minutes (configurable).
- `web_fetch` does a plain HTTP GET and extracts readable content
  (HTML → markdown/text). It does **not** execute JavaScript.
- `web_fetch` is enabled by default (unless explicitly disabled).

## Choosing a search provider

| Provider | Pros | Cons | API Key |
|----------|------|------|---------|
| **Brave** (default) | Fast, structured results, free tier | Traditional search results | `BRAVE_API_KEY` |
| **Perplexity** | AI-synthesized answers, citations, real-time | Requires Perplexity or OpenRouter access | `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` or `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY` |

See [Brave Search setup](/brave-search) and [Perplexity Sonar](/perplexity) for provider-specific details.

Set the provider in config:

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        provider: "brave"  // or "perplexity"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Example: switch to Perplexity Sonar (direct API):

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        provider: "perplexity",
        perplexity: {
          apiKey: "pplx-...",
          baseUrl: "https://api.perplexity.ai",
          model: "perplexity/sonar-pro"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Getting a Brave API key

1) Create a Brave Search API account at https://brave.com/search/api/
2) In the dashboard, choose the **Data for Search** plan (not “Data for AI”) and generate an API key.
3) Run `clawdbot configure --section web` to store the key in config (recommended), or set `BRAVE_API_KEY` in your environment.

Brave provides a free tier plus paid plans; check the Brave API portal for the
current limits and pricing.

### Where to set the key (recommended)

**Recommended:** run `clawdbot configure --section web`. It stores the key in
`~/.clawdbot/clawdbot.json` under `tools.web.search.apiKey`.

**Environment alternative:** set `BRAVE_API_KEY` in the Gateway process
environment. For a gateway install, put it in `~/.clawdbot/.env` (or your
service environment). See [Env vars](/help/faq#how-does-clawdbot-load-environment-variables).

## Using Perplexity (direct or via OpenRouter)

Perplexity Sonar models have built-in web search capabilities and return AI-synthesized
answers with citations. You can use them via OpenRouter (no credit card required - supports
crypto/prepaid).

### Getting an OpenRouter API key

1) Create an account at https://openrouter.ai/
2) Add credits (supports crypto, prepaid, or credit card)
3) Generate an API key in your account settings

### Setting up Perplexity search

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        enabled: true,
        provider: "perplexity",
        perplexity: {
          // API key (optional if OPENROUTER_API_KEY or PERPLEXITY_API_KEY is set)
          apiKey: "sk-or-v1-...",
          // Base URL (key-aware default if omitted)
          baseUrl: "https://openrouter.ai/api/v1",
          // Model (defaults to perplexity/sonar-pro)
          model: "perplexity/sonar-pro"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**Environment alternative:** set `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` or `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY` in the Gateway
environment. For a gateway install, put it in `~/.clawdbot/.env`.

If no base URL is set, Clawdbot chooses a default based on the API key source:

- `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY` or `pplx-...` → `https://api.perplexity.ai`
- `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` or `sk-or-...` → `https://openrouter.ai/api/v1`
- Unknown key formats → OpenRouter (safe fallback)

### Available Perplexity models

| Model | Description | Best for |
|-------|-------------|----------|
| `perplexity/sonar` | Fast Q&A with web search | Quick lookups |
| `perplexity/sonar-pro` (default) | Multi-step reasoning with web search | Complex questions |
| `perplexity/sonar-reasoning-pro` | Chain-of-thought analysis | Deep research |

## web_search

Search the web using your configured provider.

### Requirements

- `tools.web.search.enabled` must not be `false` (default: enabled)
- API key for your chosen provider:
  - **Brave**: `BRAVE_API_KEY` or `tools.web.search.apiKey`
  - **Perplexity**: `OPENROUTER_API_KEY`, `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY`, or `tools.web.search.perplexity.apiKey`

### Config

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        enabled: true,
        apiKey: "BRAVE_API_KEY_HERE", // optional if BRAVE_API_KEY is set
        maxResults: 5,
        timeoutSeconds: 30,
        cacheTtlMinutes: 15
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Tool parameters

- `query` (required)
- `count` (1–10; default from config)
- `country` (optional): 2-letter country code for region-specific results (e.g., "DE", "US", "ALL"). If omitted, Brave chooses its default region.
- `search_lang` (optional): ISO language code for search results (e.g., "de", "en", "fr")
- `ui_lang` (optional): ISO language code for UI elements
- `freshness` (optional, Brave only): filter by discovery time (`pd`, `pw`, `pm`, `py`, or `YYYY-MM-DDtoYYYY-MM-DD`)

**Examples:**

```javascript
// German-specific search
await web_search({
  query: "TV online schauen",
  count: 10,
  country: "DE",
  search_lang: "de"
});

// French search with French UI
await web_search({
  query: "actualités",
  country: "FR",
  search_lang: "fr",
  ui_lang: "fr"
});

// Recent results (past week)
await web_search({
  query: "TMBG interview",
  freshness: "pw"
});
```

## web_fetch

Fetch a URL and extract readable content.

### Requirements

- `tools.web.fetch.enabled` must not be `false` (default: enabled)
- Optional Firecrawl fallback: set `tools.web.fetch.firecrawl.apiKey` or `FIRECRAWL_API_KEY`.

### Config

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      fetch: {
        enabled: true,
        maxChars: 50000,
        timeoutSeconds: 30,
        cacheTtlMinutes: 15,
        maxRedirects: 3,
        userAgent: "Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 14_7_2) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/122.0.0.0 Safari/537.36",
        readability: true,
        firecrawl: {
          enabled: true,
          apiKey: "FIRECRAWL_API_KEY_HERE", // optional if FIRECRAWL_API_KEY is set
          baseUrl: "https://api.firecrawl.dev",
          onlyMainContent: true,
          maxAgeMs: 86400000, // ms (1 day)
          timeoutSeconds: 60
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Tool parameters

- `url` (required, http/https only)
- `extractMode` (`markdown` | `text`)
- `maxChars` (truncate long pages)

Notes:
- `web_fetch` uses Readability (main-content extraction) first, then Firecrawl (if configured). If both fail, the tool returns an error.
- Firecrawl requests use bot-circumvention mode and cache results by default.
- `web_fetch` sends a Chrome-like User-Agent and `Accept-Language` by default; override `userAgent` if needed.
- `web_fetch` blocks private/internal hostnames and re-checks redirects (limit with `maxRedirects`).
- `web_fetch` is best-effort extraction; some sites will need the browser tool.
- See [Firecrawl](/tools/firecrawl) for key setup and service details.
- Responses are cached (default 15 minutes) to reduce repeated fetches.
- If you use tool profiles/allowlists, add `web_search`/`web_fetch` or `group:web`.
- If the Brave key is missing, `web_search` returns a short setup hint with a docs link.

Commit message:

refactor: rename clawdbot to moltbot with legacy compat

docs/tools/web.md, after:

---
summary: "Web search + fetch tools (Brave Search API, Perplexity direct/OpenRouter)"
read_when:
  - You want to enable web_search or web_fetch
  - You need Brave Search API key setup
  - You want to use Perplexity Sonar for web search
---

# Web tools

Moltbot ships two lightweight web tools:

- `web_search` — Search the web via Brave Search API (default) or Perplexity Sonar (direct or via OpenRouter).
- `web_fetch` — HTTP fetch + readable extraction (HTML → markdown/text).

These are **not** browser automation. For JS-heavy sites or logins, use the
[Browser tool](/tools/browser).

## How it works

- `web_search` calls your configured provider and returns results.
  - **Brave** (default): returns structured results (title, URL, snippet).
  - **Perplexity**: returns AI-synthesized answers with citations from real-time web search.
- Results are cached by query for 15 minutes (configurable).
- `web_fetch` does a plain HTTP GET and extracts readable content
  (HTML → markdown/text). It does **not** execute JavaScript.
- `web_fetch` is enabled by default (unless explicitly disabled).

## Choosing a search provider

| Provider | Pros | Cons | API Key |
|----------|------|------|---------|
| **Brave** (default) | Fast, structured results, free tier | Traditional search results | `BRAVE_API_KEY` |
| **Perplexity** | AI-synthesized answers, citations, real-time | Requires Perplexity or OpenRouter access | `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` or `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY` |

See [Brave Search setup](/brave-search) and [Perplexity Sonar](/perplexity) for provider-specific details.

Set the provider in config:

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        provider: "brave"  // or "perplexity"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Example: switch to Perplexity Sonar (direct API):

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        provider: "perplexity",
        perplexity: {
          apiKey: "pplx-...",
          baseUrl: "https://api.perplexity.ai",
          model: "perplexity/sonar-pro"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Getting a Brave API key

1) Create a Brave Search API account at https://brave.com/search/api/
2) In the dashboard, choose the **Data for Search** plan (not “Data for AI”) and generate an API key.
3) Run `moltbot configure --section web` to store the key in config (recommended), or set `BRAVE_API_KEY` in your environment.

Brave provides a free tier plus paid plans; check the Brave API portal for the
current limits and pricing.

### Where to set the key (recommended)

**Recommended:** run `moltbot configure --section web`. It stores the key in
`~/.clawdbot/moltbot.json` under `tools.web.search.apiKey`.

**Environment alternative:** set `BRAVE_API_KEY` in the Gateway process
environment. For a gateway install, put it in `~/.clawdbot/.env` (or your
service environment). See [Env vars](/help/faq#how-does-moltbot-load-environment-variables).

## Using Perplexity (direct or via OpenRouter)

Perplexity Sonar models have built-in web search capabilities and return AI-synthesized
answers with citations. You can use them via OpenRouter (no credit card required - supports
crypto/prepaid).

### Getting an OpenRouter API key

1) Create an account at https://openrouter.ai/
2) Add credits (supports crypto, prepaid, or credit card)
3) Generate an API key in your account settings

### Setting up Perplexity search

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        enabled: true,
        provider: "perplexity",
        perplexity: {
          // API key (optional if OPENROUTER_API_KEY or PERPLEXITY_API_KEY is set)
          apiKey: "sk-or-v1-...",
          // Base URL (key-aware default if omitted)
          baseUrl: "https://openrouter.ai/api/v1",
          // Model (defaults to perplexity/sonar-pro)
          model: "perplexity/sonar-pro"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**Environment alternative:** set `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` or `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY` in the Gateway
environment. For a gateway install, put it in `~/.clawdbot/.env`.

If no base URL is set, Moltbot chooses a default based on the API key source:

- `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY` or `pplx-...` → `https://api.perplexity.ai`
- `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` or `sk-or-...` → `https://openrouter.ai/api/v1`
- Unknown key formats → OpenRouter (safe fallback)

### Available Perplexity models

| Model | Description | Best for |
|-------|-------------|----------|
| `perplexity/sonar` | Fast Q&A with web search | Quick lookups |
| `perplexity/sonar-pro` (default) | Multi-step reasoning with web search | Complex questions |
| `perplexity/sonar-reasoning-pro` | Chain-of-thought analysis | Deep research |

## web_search

Search the web using your configured provider.

### Requirements

- `tools.web.search.enabled` must not be `false` (default: enabled)
- API key for your chosen provider:
  - **Brave**: `BRAVE_API_KEY` or `tools.web.search.apiKey`
  - **Perplexity**: `OPENROUTER_API_KEY`, `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY`, or `tools.web.search.perplexity.apiKey`

### Config

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        enabled: true,
        apiKey: "BRAVE_API_KEY_HERE", // optional if BRAVE_API_KEY is set
        maxResults: 5,
        timeoutSeconds: 30,
        cacheTtlMinutes: 15
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Tool parameters

- `query` (required)
- `count` (1–10; default from config)
- `country` (optional): 2-letter country code for region-specific results (e.g., "DE", "US", "ALL"). If omitted, Brave chooses its default region.
- `search_lang` (optional): ISO language code for search results (e.g., "de", "en", "fr")
- `ui_lang` (optional): ISO language code for UI elements
- `freshness` (optional, Brave only): filter by discovery time (`pd`, `pw`, `pm`, `py`, or `YYYY-MM-DDtoYYYY-MM-DD`)

**Examples:**

```javascript
// German-specific search
await web_search({
  query: "TV online schauen",
  count: 10,
  country: "DE",
  search_lang: "de"
});

// French search with French UI
await web_search({
  query: "actualités",
  country: "FR",
  search_lang: "fr",
  ui_lang: "fr"
});

// Recent results (past week)
await web_search({
  query: "TMBG interview",
  freshness: "pw"
});
```

## web_fetch

Fetch a URL and extract readable content.

### Requirements

- `tools.web.fetch.enabled` must not be `false` (default: enabled)
- Optional Firecrawl fallback: set `tools.web.fetch.firecrawl.apiKey` or `FIRECRAWL_API_KEY`.

### Config

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      fetch: {
        enabled: true,
        maxChars: 50000,
        timeoutSeconds: 30,
        cacheTtlMinutes: 15,
        maxRedirects: 3,
        userAgent: "Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 14_7_2) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/122.0.0.0 Safari/537.36",
        readability: true,
        firecrawl: {
          enabled: true,
          apiKey: "FIRECRAWL_API_KEY_HERE", // optional if FIRECRAWL_API_KEY is set
          baseUrl: "https://api.firecrawl.dev",
          onlyMainContent: true,
          maxAgeMs: 86400000, // ms (1 day)
          timeoutSeconds: 60
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Tool parameters

- `url` (required, http/https only)
- `extractMode` (`markdown` | `text`)
- `maxChars` (truncate long pages)

Notes:
- `web_fetch` uses Readability (main-content extraction) first, then Firecrawl (if configured). If both fail, the tool returns an error.
- Firecrawl requests use bot-circumvention mode and cache results by default.
- `web_fetch` sends a Chrome-like User-Agent and `Accept-Language` by default; override `userAgent` if needed.
- `web_fetch` blocks private/internal hostnames and re-checks redirects (limit with `maxRedirects`).
- `web_fetch` is best-effort extraction; some sites will need the browser tool.
- See [Firecrawl](/tools/firecrawl) for key setup and service details.
- Responses are cached (default 15 minutes) to reduce repeated fetches.
- If you use tool profiles/allowlists, add `web_search`/`web_fetch` or `group:web`.
- If the Brave key is missing, `web_search` returns a short setup hint with a docs link.
