docs/gateway/openresponses-http-api.md, before:

---
summary: "Expose an OpenResponses-compatible /v1/responses HTTP endpoint from the Gateway"
read_when:
  - Integrating clients that speak the OpenResponses API
  - You want item-based inputs, client tool calls, or SSE events
title: "OpenResponses API"
---

# OpenResponses API (HTTP)

OpenClaw’s Gateway can serve an OpenResponses-compatible `POST /v1/responses` endpoint.

This endpoint is **disabled by default**. Enable it in config first.

- `POST /v1/responses`
- Same port as the Gateway (WS + HTTP multiplex): `http://<gateway-host>:<port>/v1/responses`

Under the hood, requests are executed as a normal Gateway agent run (same codepath as
`openclaw agent`), so routing/permissions/config match your Gateway.

## Authentication

Uses the Gateway auth configuration. Send a bearer token:

- `Authorization: Bearer <token>`

Notes:

- When `gateway.auth.mode="token"`, use `gateway.auth.token` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN`).
- When `gateway.auth.mode="password"`, use `gateway.auth.password` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_PASSWORD`).

## Choosing an agent

No custom headers required: encode the agent id in the OpenResponses `model` field:

- `model: "openclaw:<agentId>"` (example: `"openclaw:main"`, `"openclaw:beta"`)
- `model: "agent:<agentId>"` (alias)

Or target a specific OpenClaw agent by header:

- `x-openclaw-agent-id: <agentId>` (default: `main`)

Advanced:

- `x-openclaw-session-key: <sessionKey>` to fully control session routing.

## Enabling the endpoint

Set `gateway.http.endpoints.responses.enabled` to `true`:

```json5
{
  gateway: {
    http: {
      endpoints: {
        responses: { enabled: true },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

## Disabling the endpoint

Set `gateway.http.endpoints.responses.enabled` to `false`:

```json5
{
  gateway: {
    http: {
      endpoints: {
        responses: { enabled: false },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

## Session behavior

By default the endpoint is **stateless per request** (a new session key is generated each call).

If the request includes an OpenResponses `user` string, the Gateway derives a stable session key
from it, so repeated calls can share an agent session.

## Request shape (supported)

The request follows the OpenResponses API with item-based input. Current support:

- `input`: string or array of item objects.
- `instructions`: merged into the system prompt.
- `tools`: client tool definitions (function tools).
- `tool_choice`: filter or require client tools.
- `stream`: enables SSE streaming.
- `max_output_tokens`: best-effort output limit (provider dependent).
- `user`: stable session routing.

Accepted but **currently ignored**:

- `max_tool_calls`
- `reasoning`
- `metadata`
- `store`
- `previous_response_id`
- `truncation`

## Items (input)

### `message`

Roles: `system`, `developer`, `user`, `assistant`.

- `system` and `developer` are appended to the system prompt.
- The most recent `user` or `function_call_output` item becomes the “current message.”
- Earlier user/assistant messages are included as history for context.

### `function_call_output` (turn-based tools)

Send tool results back to the model:

```json
{
  "type": "function_call_output",
  "call_id": "call_123",
  "output": "{\"temperature\": \"72F\"}"
}
```

### `reasoning` and `item_reference`

Accepted for schema compatibility but ignored when building the prompt.

## Tools (client-side function tools)

Provide tools with `tools: [{ type: "function", function: { name, description?, parameters? } }]`.

If the agent decides to call a tool, the response returns a `function_call` output item.
You then send a follow-up request with `function_call_output` to continue the turn.

## Images (`input_image`)

Supports base64 or URL sources:

```json
{
  "type": "input_image",
  "source": { "type": "url", "url": "https://example.com/image.png" }
}
```

Allowed MIME types (current): `image/jpeg`, `image/png`, `image/gif`, `image/webp`.
Max size (current): 10MB.

## Files (`input_file`)

Supports base64 or URL sources:

```json
{
  "type": "input_file",
  "source": {
    "type": "base64",
    "media_type": "text/plain",
    "data": "SGVsbG8gV29ybGQh",
    "filename": "hello.txt"
  }
}
```

Allowed MIME types (current): `text/plain`, `text/markdown`, `text/html`, `text/csv`,
`application/json`, `application/pdf`.

Max size (current): 5MB.

Current behavior:

- File content is decoded and added to the **system prompt**, not the user message,
  so it stays ephemeral (not persisted in session history).
- PDFs are parsed for text. If little text is found, the first pages are rasterized
  into images and passed to the model.

PDF parsing uses the Node-friendly `pdfjs-dist` legacy build (no worker). The modern
PDF.js build expects browser workers/DOM globals, so it is not used in the Gateway.

URL fetch defaults:

- `files.allowUrl`: `true`
- `images.allowUrl`: `true`
- `maxUrlParts`: `8` (total URL-based `input_file` + `input_image` parts per request)
- Requests are guarded (DNS resolution, private IP blocking, redirect caps, timeouts).
- Optional hostname allowlists are supported per input type (`files.urlAllowlist`, `images.urlAllowlist`).
  - Exact host: `"cdn.example.com"`
  - Wildcard subdomains: `"*.assets.example.com"` (does not match apex)

## File + image limits (config)

Defaults can be tuned under `gateway.http.endpoints.responses`:

```json5
{
  gateway: {
    http: {
      endpoints: {
        responses: {
          enabled: true,
          maxBodyBytes: 20000000,
          maxUrlParts: 8,
          files: {
            allowUrl: true,
            urlAllowlist: ["cdn.example.com", "*.assets.example.com"],
            allowedMimes: [
              "text/plain",
              "text/markdown",
              "text/html",
              "text/csv",
              "application/json",
              "application/pdf",
            ],
            maxBytes: 5242880,
            maxChars: 200000,
            maxRedirects: 3,
            timeoutMs: 10000,
            pdf: {
              maxPages: 4,
              maxPixels: 4000000,
              minTextChars: 200,
            },
          },
          images: {
            allowUrl: true,
            urlAllowlist: ["images.example.com"],
            allowedMimes: ["image/jpeg", "image/png", "image/gif", "image/webp"],
            maxBytes: 10485760,
            maxRedirects: 3,
            timeoutMs: 10000,
          },
        },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

Defaults when omitted:

- `maxBodyBytes`: 20MB
- `maxUrlParts`: 8
- `files.maxBytes`: 5MB
- `files.maxChars`: 200k
- `files.maxRedirects`: 3
- `files.timeoutMs`: 10s
- `files.pdf.maxPages`: 4
- `files.pdf.maxPixels`: 4,000,000
- `files.pdf.minTextChars`: 200
- `images.maxBytes`: 10MB
- `images.maxRedirects`: 3
- `images.timeoutMs`: 10s

Security note:

- URL allowlists are enforced before fetch and on redirect hops.
- Allowlisting a hostname does not bypass private/internal IP blocking.
- For internet-exposed gateways, apply network egress controls in addition to app-level guards.
  See [Security](/gateway/security).

## Streaming (SSE)

Set `stream: true` to receive Server-Sent Events (SSE):

- `Content-Type: text/event-stream`
- Each event line is `event: <type>` and `data: <json>`
- Stream ends with `data: [DONE]`

Event types currently emitted:

- `response.created`
- `response.in_progress`
- `response.output_item.added`
- `response.content_part.added`
- `response.output_text.delta`
- `response.output_text.done`
- `response.content_part.done`
- `response.output_item.done`
- `response.completed`
- `response.failed` (on error)

## Usage

`usage` is populated when the underlying provider reports token counts.

## Errors

Errors use a JSON object like:

```json
{ "error": { "message": "...", "type": "invalid_request_error" } }
```

Common cases:

- `401` missing/invalid auth
- `400` invalid request body
- `405` wrong method

## Examples

Non-streaming:

```bash
curl -sS http://127.0.0.1:18789/v1/responses \
  -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_TOKEN' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -H 'x-openclaw-agent-id: main' \
  -d '{
    "model": "openclaw",
    "input": "hi"
  }'
```

Streaming:

```bash
curl -N http://127.0.0.1:18789/v1/responses \
  -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_TOKEN' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -H 'x-openclaw-agent-id: main' \
  -d '{
    "model": "openclaw",
    "stream": true,
    "input": "hi"
  }'
```

Commit message:

feat(gateway): add auth rate-limiting & brute-force protection (#15035)
* feat(gateway): add auth rate-limiting & brute-force protection

Add a per-IP sliding-window rate limiter to Gateway authentication
endpoints (HTTP, WebSocket upgrade, and WS message-level auth).

When gateway.auth.rateLimit is configured, failed auth attempts are
tracked per client IP. Once the threshold is exceeded within the
sliding window, further attempts are blocked with HTTP 429 + Retry-After
until the lockout period expires. Loopback addresses are exempt by
default so local CLI sessions are never locked out.

The limiter is only created when explicitly configured (undefined
otherwise), keeping the feature fully opt-in and backward-compatible.

* fix(gateway): isolate auth rate-limit scopes and normalize 429 responses

---------

Co-authored-by: buerbaumer <buerbaumer@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Peter Steinberger <steipete@gmail.com>

docs/gateway/openresponses-http-api.md, after:

---
summary: "Expose an OpenResponses-compatible /v1/responses HTTP endpoint from the Gateway"
read_when:
  - Integrating clients that speak the OpenResponses API
  - You want item-based inputs, client tool calls, or SSE events
title: "OpenResponses API"
---

# OpenResponses API (HTTP)

OpenClaw’s Gateway can serve an OpenResponses-compatible `POST /v1/responses` endpoint.

This endpoint is **disabled by default**. Enable it in config first.

- `POST /v1/responses`
- Same port as the Gateway (WS + HTTP multiplex): `http://<gateway-host>:<port>/v1/responses`

Under the hood, requests are executed as a normal Gateway agent run (same codepath as
`openclaw agent`), so routing/permissions/config match your Gateway.

## Authentication

Uses the Gateway auth configuration. Send a bearer token:

- `Authorization: Bearer <token>`

Notes:

- When `gateway.auth.mode="token"`, use `gateway.auth.token` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN`).
- When `gateway.auth.mode="password"`, use `gateway.auth.password` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_PASSWORD`).
- If `gateway.auth.rateLimit` is configured and too many auth failures occur, the endpoint returns `429` with `Retry-After`.

## Choosing an agent

No custom headers required: encode the agent id in the OpenResponses `model` field:

- `model: "openclaw:<agentId>"` (example: `"openclaw:main"`, `"openclaw:beta"`)
- `model: "agent:<agentId>"` (alias)

Or target a specific OpenClaw agent by header:

- `x-openclaw-agent-id: <agentId>` (default: `main`)

Advanced:

- `x-openclaw-session-key: <sessionKey>` to fully control session routing.

## Enabling the endpoint

Set `gateway.http.endpoints.responses.enabled` to `true`:

```json5
{
  gateway: {
    http: {
      endpoints: {
        responses: { enabled: true },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

## Disabling the endpoint

Set `gateway.http.endpoints.responses.enabled` to `false`:

```json5
{
  gateway: {
    http: {
      endpoints: {
        responses: { enabled: false },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

## Session behavior

By default the endpoint is **stateless per request** (a new session key is generated each call).

If the request includes an OpenResponses `user` string, the Gateway derives a stable session key
from it, so repeated calls can share an agent session.

## Request shape (supported)

The request follows the OpenResponses API with item-based input. Current support:

- `input`: string or array of item objects.
- `instructions`: merged into the system prompt.
- `tools`: client tool definitions (function tools).
- `tool_choice`: filter or require client tools.
- `stream`: enables SSE streaming.
- `max_output_tokens`: best-effort output limit (provider dependent).
- `user`: stable session routing.

Accepted but **currently ignored**:

- `max_tool_calls`
- `reasoning`
- `metadata`
- `store`
- `previous_response_id`
- `truncation`

## Items (input)

### `message`

Roles: `system`, `developer`, `user`, `assistant`.

- `system` and `developer` are appended to the system prompt.
- The most recent `user` or `function_call_output` item becomes the “current message.”
- Earlier user/assistant messages are included as history for context.

### `function_call_output` (turn-based tools)

Send tool results back to the model:

```json
{
  "type": "function_call_output",
  "call_id": "call_123",
  "output": "{\"temperature\": \"72F\"}"
}
```

### `reasoning` and `item_reference`

Accepted for schema compatibility but ignored when building the prompt.

## Tools (client-side function tools)

Provide tools with `tools: [{ type: "function", function: { name, description?, parameters? } }]`.

If the agent decides to call a tool, the response returns a `function_call` output item.
You then send a follow-up request with `function_call_output` to continue the turn.

## Images (`input_image`)

Supports base64 or URL sources:

```json
{
  "type": "input_image",
  "source": { "type": "url", "url": "https://example.com/image.png" }
}
```

Allowed MIME types (current): `image/jpeg`, `image/png`, `image/gif`, `image/webp`.
Max size (current): 10MB.

## Files (`input_file`)

Supports base64 or URL sources:

```json
{
  "type": "input_file",
  "source": {
    "type": "base64",
    "media_type": "text/plain",
    "data": "SGVsbG8gV29ybGQh",
    "filename": "hello.txt"
  }
}
```

Allowed MIME types (current): `text/plain`, `text/markdown`, `text/html`, `text/csv`,
`application/json`, `application/pdf`.

Max size (current): 5MB.

Current behavior:

- File content is decoded and added to the **system prompt**, not the user message,
  so it stays ephemeral (not persisted in session history).
- PDFs are parsed for text. If little text is found, the first pages are rasterized
  into images and passed to the model.

PDF parsing uses the Node-friendly `pdfjs-dist` legacy build (no worker). The modern
PDF.js build expects browser workers/DOM globals, so it is not used in the Gateway.

URL fetch defaults:

- `files.allowUrl`: `true`
- `images.allowUrl`: `true`
- `maxUrlParts`: `8` (total URL-based `input_file` + `input_image` parts per request)
- Requests are guarded (DNS resolution, private IP blocking, redirect caps, timeouts).
- Optional hostname allowlists are supported per input type (`files.urlAllowlist`, `images.urlAllowlist`).
  - Exact host: `"cdn.example.com"`
  - Wildcard subdomains: `"*.assets.example.com"` (does not match apex)

## File + image limits (config)

Defaults can be tuned under `gateway.http.endpoints.responses`:

```json5
{
  gateway: {
    http: {
      endpoints: {
        responses: {
          enabled: true,
          maxBodyBytes: 20000000,
          maxUrlParts: 8,
          files: {
            allowUrl: true,
            urlAllowlist: ["cdn.example.com", "*.assets.example.com"],
            allowedMimes: [
              "text/plain",
              "text/markdown",
              "text/html",
              "text/csv",
              "application/json",
              "application/pdf",
            ],
            maxBytes: 5242880,
            maxChars: 200000,
            maxRedirects: 3,
            timeoutMs: 10000,
            pdf: {
              maxPages: 4,
              maxPixels: 4000000,
              minTextChars: 200,
            },
          },
          images: {
            allowUrl: true,
            urlAllowlist: ["images.example.com"],
            allowedMimes: ["image/jpeg", "image/png", "image/gif", "image/webp"],
            maxBytes: 10485760,
            maxRedirects: 3,
            timeoutMs: 10000,
          },
        },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

Defaults when omitted:

- `maxBodyBytes`: 20MB
- `maxUrlParts`: 8
- `files.maxBytes`: 5MB
- `files.maxChars`: 200k
- `files.maxRedirects`: 3
- `files.timeoutMs`: 10s
- `files.pdf.maxPages`: 4
- `files.pdf.maxPixels`: 4,000,000
- `files.pdf.minTextChars`: 200
- `images.maxBytes`: 10MB
- `images.maxRedirects`: 3
- `images.timeoutMs`: 10s

Security note:

- URL allowlists are enforced before fetch and on redirect hops.
- Allowlisting a hostname does not bypass private/internal IP blocking.
- For internet-exposed gateways, apply network egress controls in addition to app-level guards.
  See [Security](/gateway/security).

## Streaming (SSE)

Set `stream: true` to receive Server-Sent Events (SSE):

- `Content-Type: text/event-stream`
- Each event line is `event: <type>` and `data: <json>`
- Stream ends with `data: [DONE]`

Event types currently emitted:

- `response.created`
- `response.in_progress`
- `response.output_item.added`
- `response.content_part.added`
- `response.output_text.delta`
- `response.output_text.done`
- `response.content_part.done`
- `response.output_item.done`
- `response.completed`
- `response.failed` (on error)

## Usage

`usage` is populated when the underlying provider reports token counts.

## Errors

Errors use a JSON object like:

```json
{ "error": { "message": "...", "type": "invalid_request_error" } }
```

Common cases:

- `401` missing/invalid auth
- `400` invalid request body
- `405` wrong method

## Examples

Non-streaming:

```bash
curl -sS http://127.0.0.1:18789/v1/responses \
  -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_TOKEN' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -H 'x-openclaw-agent-id: main' \
  -d '{
    "model": "openclaw",
    "input": "hi"
  }'
```

Streaming:

```bash
curl -N http://127.0.0.1:18789/v1/responses \
  -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_TOKEN' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -H 'x-openclaw-agent-id: main' \
  -d '{
    "model": "openclaw",
    "stream": true,
    "input": "hi"
  }'
```
