docs/gateway/tools-invoke-http-api.md, before:

---
summary: "Invoke a single tool directly via the Gateway HTTP endpoint"
read_when:
  - Calling tools without running a full agent turn
  - Building automations that need tool policy enforcement
title: "Tools Invoke API"
---

# Tools Invoke (HTTP)

OpenClaw’s Gateway exposes a simple HTTP endpoint for invoking a single tool directly. It is always enabled, but gated by Gateway auth and tool policy.

- `POST /tools/invoke`
- Same port as the Gateway (WS + HTTP multiplex): `http://<gateway-host>:<port>/tools/invoke`

Default max payload size is 2 MB.

## Authentication

Uses the Gateway auth configuration. Send a bearer token:

- `Authorization: Bearer <token>`

Notes:

- When `gateway.auth.mode="token"`, use `gateway.auth.token` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN`).
- When `gateway.auth.mode="password"`, use `gateway.auth.password` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_PASSWORD`).

## Request body

```json
{
  "tool": "sessions_list",
  "action": "json",
  "args": {},
  "sessionKey": "main",
  "dryRun": false
}
```

Fields:

- `tool` (string, required): tool name to invoke.
- `action` (string, optional): mapped into args if the tool schema supports `action` and the args payload omitted it.
- `args` (object, optional): tool-specific arguments.
- `sessionKey` (string, optional): target session key. If omitted or `"main"`, the Gateway uses the configured main session key (honors `session.mainKey` and default agent, or `global` in global scope).
- `dryRun` (boolean, optional): reserved for future use; currently ignored.

## Policy + routing behavior

Tool availability is filtered through the same policy chain used by Gateway agents:

- `tools.profile` / `tools.byProvider.profile`
- `tools.allow` / `tools.byProvider.allow`
- `agents.<id>.tools.allow` / `agents.<id>.tools.byProvider.allow`
- group policies (if the session key maps to a group or channel)
- subagent policy (when invoking with a subagent session key)

If a tool is not allowed by policy, the endpoint returns **404**.

Gateway HTTP also applies a hard deny list by default (even if session policy allows the tool):

- `sessions_spawn`
- `sessions_send`
- `gateway`
- `whatsapp_login`

You can customize this deny list via `gateway.tools`:

```json5
{
  gateway: {
    tools: {
      // Additional tools to block over HTTP /tools/invoke
      deny: ["browser"],
      // Remove tools from the default deny list
      allow: ["gateway"],
    },
  },
}
```

To help group policies resolve context, you can optionally set:

- `x-openclaw-message-channel: <channel>` (example: `slack`, `telegram`)
- `x-openclaw-account-id: <accountId>` (when multiple accounts exist)

## Responses

- `200` → `{ ok: true, result }`
- `400` → `{ ok: false, error: { type, message } }` (invalid request or tool error)
- `401` → unauthorized
- `404` → tool not available (not found or not allowlisted)
- `405` → method not allowed

## Example

```bash
curl -sS http://127.0.0.1:18789/tools/invoke \
  -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_TOKEN' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "tool": "sessions_list",
    "action": "json",
    "args": {}
  }'
```

Commit message:

feat(gateway): add auth rate-limiting & brute-force protection (#15035)
* feat(gateway): add auth rate-limiting & brute-force protection

Add a per-IP sliding-window rate limiter to Gateway authentication
endpoints (HTTP, WebSocket upgrade, and WS message-level auth).

When gateway.auth.rateLimit is configured, failed auth attempts are
tracked per client IP. Once the threshold is exceeded within the
sliding window, further attempts are blocked with HTTP 429 + Retry-After
until the lockout period expires. Loopback addresses are exempt by
default so local CLI sessions are never locked out.

The limiter is only created when explicitly configured (undefined
otherwise), keeping the feature fully opt-in and backward-compatible.

* fix(gateway): isolate auth rate-limit scopes and normalize 429 responses

---------

Co-authored-by: buerbaumer <buerbaumer@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Peter Steinberger <steipete@gmail.com>

docs/gateway/tools-invoke-http-api.md, after:

---
summary: "Invoke a single tool directly via the Gateway HTTP endpoint"
read_when:
  - Calling tools without running a full agent turn
  - Building automations that need tool policy enforcement
title: "Tools Invoke API"
---

# Tools Invoke (HTTP)

OpenClaw’s Gateway exposes a simple HTTP endpoint for invoking a single tool directly. It is always enabled, but gated by Gateway auth and tool policy.

- `POST /tools/invoke`
- Same port as the Gateway (WS + HTTP multiplex): `http://<gateway-host>:<port>/tools/invoke`

Default max payload size is 2 MB.

## Authentication

Uses the Gateway auth configuration. Send a bearer token:

- `Authorization: Bearer <token>`

Notes:

- When `gateway.auth.mode="token"`, use `gateway.auth.token` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN`).
- When `gateway.auth.mode="password"`, use `gateway.auth.password` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_PASSWORD`).
- If `gateway.auth.rateLimit` is configured and too many auth failures occur, the endpoint returns `429` with `Retry-After`.

## Request body

```json
{
  "tool": "sessions_list",
  "action": "json",
  "args": {},
  "sessionKey": "main",
  "dryRun": false
}
```

Fields:

- `tool` (string, required): tool name to invoke.
- `action` (string, optional): mapped into args if the tool schema supports `action` and the args payload omitted it.
- `args` (object, optional): tool-specific arguments.
- `sessionKey` (string, optional): target session key. If omitted or `"main"`, the Gateway uses the configured main session key (honors `session.mainKey` and default agent, or `global` in global scope).
- `dryRun` (boolean, optional): reserved for future use; currently ignored.

## Policy + routing behavior

Tool availability is filtered through the same policy chain used by Gateway agents:

- `tools.profile` / `tools.byProvider.profile`
- `tools.allow` / `tools.byProvider.allow`
- `agents.<id>.tools.allow` / `agents.<id>.tools.byProvider.allow`
- group policies (if the session key maps to a group or channel)
- subagent policy (when invoking with a subagent session key)

If a tool is not allowed by policy, the endpoint returns **404**.

Gateway HTTP also applies a hard deny list by default (even if session policy allows the tool):

- `sessions_spawn`
- `sessions_send`
- `gateway`
- `whatsapp_login`

You can customize this deny list via `gateway.tools`:

```json5
{
  gateway: {
    tools: {
      // Additional tools to block over HTTP /tools/invoke
      deny: ["browser"],
      // Remove tools from the default deny list
      allow: ["gateway"],
    },
  },
}
```

To help group policies resolve context, you can optionally set:

- `x-openclaw-message-channel: <channel>` (example: `slack`, `telegram`)
- `x-openclaw-account-id: <accountId>` (when multiple accounts exist)

## Responses

- `200` → `{ ok: true, result }`
- `400` → `{ ok: false, error: { type, message } }` (invalid request or tool error)
- `401` → unauthorized
- `429` → auth rate-limited (`Retry-After` set)
- `404` → tool not available (not found or not allowlisted)
- `405` → method not allowed

## Example

```bash
curl -sS http://127.0.0.1:18789/tools/invoke \
  -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_TOKEN' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "tool": "sessions_list",
    "action": "json",
    "args": {}
  }'
```
